this is David barsamian and my guest is
David McMichael former CIA analyst he's
a board member of the Association of
national security alumni and editor of
that organizations publication
unclassified David I'm interested in
your not your but your organization's
credo covert actions are
counterproductive and damaging to the
national interest of the United States
certainly the term national interest has
been much bandied about I'm curious that
you chose to use it you know no one's
ever asked me that question before and
certainly determination of what in fact
is the national interest is goes almost
beyond politics into theology and I
think in taking that our point of view
is that the national interest is the
well-being of the people of the United
States and I think we can make a very
strong case that the indulgence and
so-called covert operations by our
government over the past 40 some years
has not been to the benefit of the
people of the United States Noam Chomsky
calls the the problem he defines it as
the vanishing pretext for the entire
period from 1945 until the collapse of
the Soviet Union that country served as
as the pretext for every and all US
intervention covert actions etc what is
now in your view the new foundations of
the national security state I think this
is what really is being debated at
various levels and in various places in
the government is easily just what is in
fact the justification for maintenance
of the of the national security state
machinery the you know in earlier times
before this machinery was was
established on a permit
basis there were always a boogie men if
you will that were raised to justify
certain policies one has only to look at
the raising of the the German Menace for
example in the period immediately after
before and after that in fact the
spanish-american war in the in the
Caribbean is a justification for the for
Wilson's interventions there for example
and of course at earlier periods we we
had but arguably were the real threats
of the Spanish presence the threat from
from Great Britain and so forth and in
the United States but the all-purpose
all-time threat of course was that of
the Soviet Union and it justified just
about anything as you point out now what
it is to be today has you know the
national security state people in some
turmoil and in fact this to a large
extent lies behind the legislation
introduced in January of 91 by Senator
Pat Moynihan the national suit the 1991
I didn't call at the National Security
Act of nineteen ninety one which was
simply to examine every piece of
legislation and executive order there
had been issued since 1945 with the
justification of national security to
see whether it had any utility at all
today well could you talk about some of
those directions that that the the
government may be moving towards radical
Islam the drug war or terrorism and
those kinds of things and also resources
because that seems to be an area of
interest to the so-called intelligence
community well as to the the
justifications these the
rationalizations if it better said than
just vacations can be found pretty red
in the reports being issued by the both
the house permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence and the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence over the last
two years in considering the
intelligence authorization these matters
are being debated as what is the purpose
of it all the points brought up you've
already touched upon them as
international terrorism the rise of
radical Islam comes up sometimes the an
interesting one is is the environmental
situation as you may know or barely
three weeks ago the vice chairman of the
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
Frank Murkowski of Alaska took the whole
committee up to Fairbanks where they
were addressed in a public affair by EF
public hearing I should say by the
director of Central Intelligence Robert
Gates who emphasized the enormous threat
to the environment caused by what else
our old enemy the Soviet Union who's
failing nuclear plants have to be
monitored constantly and one of the most
interesting things to me in Bob gates
his speech there is his expressed
willingness to make available the
surveillance resources of the
intelligence system to properly cleared
scientists through heck is intriguing in
this ends of bringing this to under the
the banner of national security rather
than a an open scientific enterprise and
of course this is this is a great
concern to me and to our association is
is the continual expansion of the
concept of national security to include
a ever increasing range of activities
which can then be placed under secret
control and manipulated for the benefit
of those who control the existing
machinery so that's that that in fact is
an area that you ask on the the
resources aspect is the question that
has been intriguing one for many year
during the Cold War period one of the
justifications of the United States for
intervening either covertly or overtly
in various parts of the world was the
necessity to assure access as we say to
sources of strategic raw materials if
that's the type of resources I think you
were talking about you're nodding your
head yes so I I can tell you that's what
it is but in fact one of the more
intriguing aspects of this is that
whenever a government of which we did
not approve took control of a region
which possess the strategic raw
materials one of these first actions
taken by the United States government
was to slap an embargo on that country
and refuse to purchase from them or
otherwise acquire the strategic raw
materials in question China is a
wonderful example after 1949 United
States tonight itself absolutely access
to certain highly strategic and very
rare metals and other minerals that were
available only from China despite the
efforts of China to sell these to us and
it wasn't until nineteen seventy two and
the Shanghai accor is that we began to
buy them people can't eat these things
they've got they've got to sell now I
had one other point if you follow the
commodities markets which is a very good
thing to do on this you'll find that
demand for raw materials of the
traditional he considered strategic raw
materials is at an all-time low prices
paid to the third world are on the floor
that it's a desperate attempt by these
by the rest of the world to sell these
raw materials into a a currently
declining market for them so the
justification in terms of access to
resources i don't think stands on at
least on economic grounds i'd like you
to talk about the cultural political
atmosphere of the country in light of
all the gates that we have perhaps pun
intended as robert gates watergate Iraq
a conjugate iran gate
and how the media the role of the media
in shaping and informing public
perceptions and attitudes well I think
it's a two-part question well take the
Culture aspect first because I'm still
reacting to very to me very interesting
conference I attended just a week ago at
the carried out by the American Civil
Liberties Union's a national security
project at the Georgetown Law Center in
in Washington this brought together some
40-odd constitutional lawyers past and
present government officials and one or
two outside critics like myself to deal
with the question of presidential power
in in the making of war in the in the
post-cold war era and this a great deal
of time course was spent on the subject
of covert operations and one of the
things that struck me and here we are
talking culture was the casual nature of
a fairly lengthy discussion I went on
during the two-day period as to win not
if but when and under what conditions it
might be useful for the President of the
United States in and how much
consultation with others he should have
when he did this in the national
interest to direct the assassination of
foreign heads of state I intervened it
at one point to say you know this is a
totally illegitimate concept and to
discuss it in this manner gives you a
legitimacy which it does not deserve but
I will say to you that is a cultural
indication of how far because of the
nature of the participants they say many
of these were very distinguished and
well-known constitutional lawyers
throughout the United States were
gathered for this purpose that they
could take this as a you know as a as an
option that reasonably could be
considered so let's just say that there
has been I believe
if this is any indication over the past
40 some years a cultural development
here which allows us to to think the
previously unthinkable to speak to
previously unspeakable and in fact to
perform the acts and this is also placed
within David a what to me is the basis
for this a traditional ongoing
constitutional struggle an ideological
struggle if you will between those
forces which would prefer basically a
monarch achill form of government the
United States which all essential powers
within the hands of the President and
with the legislative role very very
limited and to those who see a more
constitutional form in which there is
time in fact for debating issues for
bringing the public in and this gets us
now again to the role of the media is
the role of the media simply to sell the
presidential program or is it a you know
part of the forum for a larger and more
open debate on the issues I think the
tendency and the trend for a very long
time has been for the the media
increasingly concentrated in the hands
as we know and I mean this is not an
overly populist position I think that
they but it simply self-evident that
control of the media and mass media
increasingly concentrated in the hands
are very few and concentrated wealth
which is itself associated with the with
the centers of power which tend to be
identified with that political sector
which looks to concentrate power in the
hands of the executive very impatient of
public participation at all is yes there
has been I think one could demonstrate a
constant trend for the media to see its
role as selling the presidential program
so I don't know if we certainly could go
on all day attempting to you know
describe these phenomena but I think
that that outlines what I what I see as
part of it and it certainly is a very
dangerous situation especially for
people who believe as I do personally in
our association does that in openness in
government and a high degree of popular
participation and decision-making well
do you see the public response to all of
these scandals and allegations of
official corruption etc as as one of the
cynicism and just dropping out and not
caring about the process at all i think
that is that is more so than than anger
and determination to to get involved in
the process and i think this is a
phenomenon which has been gathering
speed since Watergate and I think one of
the the marks of this is the
resurrection of Richard Nixon driven
from office and disgrace but unhappily
immediately after that instead of
carrying through the constitutional
process of impeachment you know as you
know impeachment is not the not the
final act where where where a bill of
impeachment and a conviction under it is
based upon criminal actions you see that
doesn't create jeopardy the person
impeached and convicted can this be
subjected to the actions of the courts
the guy was the criminal he'd yet he was
allowed to leave office his successor
the intimate available Gerald Ford
effectively granted his pardon you and I
as taxpayers pay mr. Nixon's
considerable pension and the Secret
Service protection against through the
rest of his life and the guys now a
pavia sized you know a is the most
distinguished architect of our post-war
foreign policy and on and on nobody in
fact paid the price the people around
Nixon for example Fred Malek who on mr.
Nixon's staff was directed to seek out
Jews holding policy positions in the
administration mr. Malik course today is
one of the prime directors of mr. George
Bush's political campaign as well these
guys never die by the same token the
scandals which emerged from the church
committee investigation is the pike
committee investigations of the 1970s in
the post Vietnam era exposed much
punished nothing the same thing in
spades goes for the iran-contra affair
it was laid out if you want to say as
Terrence Moran has done that this is a a
great triumph for democracy that the
truth has come out sure the truth has
come out the evidence of the crimes is
laid before the public and yet no one is
punished that is what breeds contempt
for the law and apathy in regard to the
political process because neither the
the legal system nor the political
system appears to be adequate to provide
you know penalty or hold anyone to
account I think if you're concerned for
the maintenance of a constitutional
system if you're concerned for democracy
to use a much abuse term this is very
very frightening and I think it is
reflected more in apathy and cynicism
and in anger and determination to change
certainly one of the operatives cultural
political myths of the society is that
we are indeed a nation of laws and you
know starting in grade school right up
through of the university level within
that context where do the plethora of
executive orders national security
decision directives the national
security memoranda etc where do they fit
in to that concept of a nation of laws
well I don't fit in very well at all and
this is in fact one of the things which
senator Moynihan is directed legislation
toward
general there were two General
Accounting Office studies carried out in
1988 and an updated one in 1990 trying
to trace in the field of so-called
national security what the the whole
body of executive order is national
security decision directives national
security memoranda etc none of which are
laws none of which are laws with this
with the wide exception let me say those
executive orders which are issued under
color of previous legislation and
titling the the executive to issue such
orders for example the the updated
legislation allowing a president to
declare a national emergency and the
issue certain decrees they're under a
marvelous example is that is that
legislation which entitles the president
to declare that the activities and
actions of a certain country so threaten
the national security of the United
States that he's entitled undertake a
very wide range of action including the
establishment of economic sanctions upon
that country and I think many of us will
recall it in in may of nineteen eighty
five then president reagan declared that
the actions of the government of
Nicaragua a country of about three and a
half million souls in great poverty was
so threatened the national security of
the United States that we were entitled
to abrogate the outstanding treaty of
commerce and friendship with that
country and lay on a total trade embargo
in fact something found totally illegal
by the International Court of Justice
but there are an enormous range of
powers given to the president's under
the but make the point though the habit
has come oak treating executive orders
as if they had the force of law in fact
they do not the second point to be made
David in this area is it many
constitutional scholars especially those
who support the scholars is probably not
the right word list a propagandist in
the case of the john norton mores of
this world the who support the extreme
expression of presidential power in
almost all areas constantly argue that
congress by its power of the purse in
fact can control these activities should
congress wish to do so and without
wishing to let a often supine inclusive
onymous congress off the hook in these
matters the point is though that another
development of the past 40 years or so
has been the development of what we
might call this enormous slush funds
within the national security state as
you know the Constitution does not
permit a the existence of a
quote-unquote standing army we have a
constitution every two years at a
minimum to provide a new budget for the
department of defense for the military
yet the the process of authorization and
appropriation has developed in such a
way that pipeline money in the hundreds
of billions of dollars exists which
allows these operations to go on for
years at a time a classic example of
this in our little field of intelligence
is that in in November of 1990 George
Bush President Bush vetoed the 1991
intelligence authorization a very
interesting process of negotiation and
law writing went on until a bill was
produced and finally signed in August of
1991 that was a 10-month period in which
by law there was no money yet
interestingly enough the the defense
appropriation bill in which the
intelligence authorization is buried in
a classified portion
had been passed also in November 1990
and that money which was not authorized
and it was an excess of 30 billions of
dollars in that year was spent over the
next ten months totally illegally I
talked at that time to members of the
Senate Intelligence Committee staff and
they assured me yes the money was being
spent illegally yet to prevent a
constitutional crisis the Congress was
not challenging it openly and at the
same time the White House was not
claiming publicly any right to spend it
you can see by this which is what we're
talking about how politically speaking
even what is is considered to be the
final weapon of Congress in these areas
the power of the purse is evaded and
done on a consistent basis I know you
have personal experience we just talked
about domestic law and it's rather
ambiguities what about on the
international level with with the World
Court what has the u.s. record been in
recent years well us record with the
with the International Court of Justice
of course has been to when it's
convenient for the United States to deny
its applicability and when it is
convenient for the United States to
insist that it's the highest blog and
the interesting contrast is the United
States turning to the International
Court of Justice in 1978-79 during the
hostage crisis with Iran and then in the
case in which I was involved myself in
1985 in Nicaragua versus the United
States simply to deny that the court had
any jurisdiction whatsoever
interestingly by the way this is this is
one of the new manifestations of in the
post-cold war era is that the executive
branch increasingly is claiming now that
the United Nations the which effectively
United States participation on basis of
a treaty
is as our Constitution states treaty is
the law of the land is that this gives
cart boss for the president united
states to commit military forces all
around the world as if they're a
permanent declaration of war authority
existed and he does not have to turn to
Congress so in this instance the United
States especially during the Reagan
period of denouncing the United Nations
when it appeared in any way to inhibit
or limit the initiatives the United
States is now pushing especially in the
area of commitment of military force
very strongly toward insisting that the
United States where a Soviet Union's
veto is no longer to be feared and in
which the third world countries I think
effectively been cowed as the authority
for increasing you know presidential
justifying presidential initiatives
throughout the world both in terms of
the covert and overt use of military
force let's talk a little bit about the
Iraq and Iraq and and the Gulf War if
you were to put yourself within that
intellectual ideological framework of
Saddam Hussein had to go and was a
threat to the region and to the world
etc etc the kind of propaganda that was
rife just before the Gulf War wouldn't
that demand wouldn't those kinds of
requirements demand that the the
intelligence community with its enormous
apparatus remove saddam hussein rather
than engage the united states and its
allies engaged in a very costly war war
which continues to have some many many
casualties as its legacy you know see
that that goes back to a point we were
discussing earlier and david about the
the use of assassination there
movea love the inconvenient or disliked
foreign leader and certainly this is
said also wouldn't have been easier to
assassinate Hitler during the Second
World War rather than to allow the war
to take part of course that cuts both
ways you see why not have somebody
coming assassinate George Bush you know
actions arguably in various parts of the
world disturbs the national security and
national interest of some of the country
I mean this is quite international law
is all about I can also tell you that
part of international law the geneva
conventions which control the conduct of
war between nations is frequently
violated of course but you cannot under
the laws of war target a civil official
a non-combatant and kill them as a
matter of fact even if the person is in
uniform and military person once
rendered or to come back you know he
cannot simply be killed if we're going
to play by those rules of course we go
back to to coin a phrase the law of the
jungle if you will but now that that's a
non-starter and the second thing is this
the United States and is vast
intelligence apparatus and so forth I
think you one of the lessons learned
from the Gulf War is how pathetic you
know the United States intelligence was
either in its role of of gathering
information as a matter of fact in this
most recent issue of unclassified I go
through the sep tember 1989 appreciation
prepared by the Central Intelligence
Agency of the situation in Iraq in the
wake of the prosecution's begun against
the banca nazionale available it's the
Italian thanking Atlanta iron bank in it
who Atlanta branch served as the the
laundromat for
the the funds were through which Saddam
Hussein was purchasing military and
military related technology that was
pathetic i mean i can say i'm not a
Middle East expert you know but i can
tell you i know a little bit about the
preparation of intelligence estimates
and this was absolutely pathetic and of
course it can be measured against events
which occurred not long after and it was
pathetic so and of course general
Schwarzkopf i knows your personal hero
David is was vocal in his own
depreciation of the intelligence support
provided to the CIA during the conduct
of the Gulf War so okay at point 1 the
second which increasingly is known as
Iraq gate and for the revelations on
which I think the old country can was a
vote of thanks to the most courageous
man in the United States Congress which
is Henry be Gonzalez a rock in
demonstrating that the what in fact was
the United States policy toward Iraq in
the period leading up immediately to to
the gulf war itself I don't share by the
way the the thesis of my colleague Phil
Apache and others at the United States
somehow led Saddam Hussein into this I
mean you could not I do not believe
count on anybody being that dumb and I
think Saddam Hussein's barn policy in a
way conducted and the invasion of Kuwait
was absolutely insane and stupid then
you know brought about a situation but
is equally possible to look at the
manner in which the United States
conduct its policy toward Iraq from 1982
on as it attempted to build up it did
intend that was our policy to build up
Iraq to fill play the role which Iran
under the Shah had previously played as
our basic client state the the regional
policemen as it were in the area and
also to serve
and I think this is true many people
argue it as a leverage against a an
Israel which was not being cooperative
in the grand scheme of United States
politics in the Middle East but you had
this process of enormous buildup you had
sued amo Saddam Hussein who broke the
rules by the invasion of Kuwait the
rapid decision to take the undertake the
action which we did this has still not
played out altogether but one thing has
been demonstrated and once again as I
say we have to be thankful to
congressman Gonzalez for his
investigations is what you see is the
employment of these vast national
security and so-called intelligence
resources of the United States by the
supposedly canny and experienced
President George Bush and his advisers
particularly Jim Bakker of the State
Department in a way which under
examination appears to be not simply
irrational but just plain stupid and of
course there's no inconsistency between
the December 1989 US invasion of Panama
and the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in
August 1990 know that there's absolutely
not a total total violation of
international law in the case of the
invasion of panama by the way knowing
that but a total violation of the Geneva
Conventions and beginning and attack
with a massive assault against a densely
populated populated civilian area
causing untold casualties although the
United States Congress has just come to
a very convenient agreement that the
number of these casualties was only 400
and of those a number were highly
suspect and couldn't really be
considered as innocent civilians we do
distinguish between you know guilty
innocent civilians in this but no the
invasion of Panama
the unexcusable total violation of
international law yet applauded by the
Congress applauded by the people of the
United States because they have to roll
nothing succeeds like success the reason
the questions of course today being
raised about Iraq particularly is that
the apparent success now appears not to
be all that successful and as a matter
of fact serious questions are being
raised about Panama as well because we
find that in the wake of the the
operation just cause the drug trade
flourishes perhaps even more today in
Panama than it did during the heyday of
the despised Manuel Noriega so we we do
find that even where there is apparent
immediate success by the application of
overwhelming force at by the white
increasingly expensive ways in which we
can't pay for this is of course is one
of the great revelations of the Gulf War
to get back on that is the United States
the world's superpower had to go out
with a tin cup to borrow to pay for it
and it's not paid for yet and it won't
get paid for so it just adds the
revelation of the the hollowness of the
situation but but you're right the
United States in Panama you know was in
all essentials acting just as Saddam
Hussein did against Kuwait but sometimes
people pay and sometimes people don't
think and of course the aggressive
national media the investigative
contrary national media was pointing out
those contradictions to the American
people that there was this between
Panama and Kuwait well that a rhetorical
question well yes it is but but once
again David you do have to make a
distinction between the
the what appears to in in the mass media
and yet we do and I represent a course
of portion of the media yourself you're
you're a questioner these questions
appear as well even in the mass media
and of course and on the fringes the
various of other publications and the
questions are raised there there is no
doubt about that I think we have to be
careful in in in in making this
statement that there's some sort of a
massive overwhelming propaganda process
because the careful reader even if he
confines himself to for example the the
New York Times The Wall Street Journal
the Washington Post you know can find a
lot if the wall street journal for
example as whose editorial line is you
know enough to cause me to break out in
a rash consistently has provided the
lengthiest and most detailed
examinations of the Iraq cake story is
presented by Henry Gonzalez so if you
want to read it it's there to read so I
think we have to you know make that
distinction getting back to Panama the
empowerment project which i think you
know Barbara trench group out and in
California is is now distributing
nationwide the film of which they've
labored for the last two and a half
years called the Panama deception it's
been opening two in fact very favorable
reviews in the straight press all up and
down the west coast recently in Chicago
will be opening in Washington DC on
October 15th our group is sponsoring the
opening there the opening in
Philadelphia they say the I have the the
reviews that have come to Los Angeles
time the seattle post-intelligencer
other newspapers who find this hey this
is a very convincing film people ought
to see it so just let us say it is out
there the interesting thing to me
however is that it does not appear to
have serious political impact and
this you know goes back I think to the
discussion we had earlier that the
exposures periodically Watergate the the
Church Committee the assassination
committees around contra and now this
have not you know had the either the
legal or political result that we have
looked for now I blame for example in
1988 the total refusal of the the
Democratic Party to use the iran-contra
issue at all there's a total betrayal as
i feel i mean if i have a politician I
despise in this country today is Michael
Dukakis and those were around him for
failing to do what they owed the people
United States in 1988 to make that an
issue I've been watching with some
dismay the apparent refusal in this
campaign again to use these issues so I
was surprised very much surprised in the
last week to find that suddenly
especially with the revelations of
Howard Tiger one of those who went on
the famous cake and Bible trip to Turan
and I 864 remember making his national
security cam that's right he's the
Mideast specialist on the National
Security Council and in fact part of
that group which is the the gates
hearings told you if you follow them
closely that group within the National
Security Council which was arguing both
sybaris Lee against the tilt to Iraq and
very much supporting the what they
thought was a better policy visa of the
Israel and Iran that suddenly how our
teacher was a very angry man i know i'm
slightly accusations against george bush
you know that in fact George Bush was
very much in the iran-contra loop
despite his denials something which has
surfaced in the pre-trial member
recently released a pre-trial memoranda
for the upcoming prosecution or trial of
Casper Weinberger suddenly seems to have
captured the headlines
and perhaps will force this issue to be
considered publicly in the final stage
of this presidential campaign and I
would say if we're looking for a holding
people to account politically this is
one of the times that it can be done I
may have missed it but in I I don't
recall a single presidential press
conference or something on that level
where any reporter pointed out the
contradictions or inconsistencies
between the US invasion of Panama and
the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait are you
saying that those kinds of questions
have been asked and answered no I don't
say that those questions have been asked
and answered and the believe media David
you are a very experienced reporter and
follow these sorts of things what has
emerged as the protocol the etiquette if
you will of the presidential press
conference dictates that these questions
not be asked so you won't find it being
asked there but you will find them being
discussed and at very in various forums
in the press as a matter of fact as an
example is I just before coming on this
trip I received from Michael Levine the
author of deep-cover the former drug
enforcement agent I think you've had him
you've interviewed him I mean yeah who
is still battling on the issue of of the
so-called war on drugs the fraudulent
war on drugs points out and this has to
do with with presidential interview that
are not on an interview on conducted
with George Bush at the on the then I
believe not certain the date of the
interview but it goes back to in that
was in New Jersey I believe with Amy
Goodman of WBAI they are doing the 1988
presidential campaign that's right okay
so he was asked by Amy Goodman during
that interview in discussing bushes
period as director of Central
Intelligence
11 months in some days which he served
at the end the Ford administration is
the director of Central Intelligence got
him to admit that he had met with Manuel
Noriega and authorized payment to him as
a CIA asset I can tell you how much that
was is two hundred thousand dollars a
year at that time Goodman asked Bush did
you know then about Noriega involvement
in drugs and if not why not now that's
the direct question as Mike Levine says
this the pressure in the United States
has just been asked the kind of question
usually put two suspects in narcotic
trafficking conspiracy cases after
they'd been read that right if he
answered yes he was admitting to a
series of federal felonies that made a
Watergate look like jaywalking is that
if he said no he was admitting to a
level of in competence inexcusable for a
government supervisor trainee at any
level so he as Mike points out the in
his knowledge as a senior DEA guy
through that whole period Noriega
connection with the drug traffic was so
great that all you had to do was punch
the name of the computer would keep
rolling for hours is it and that in fact
under Nixon it had been seriously
discussed as to whether the United
States should you ask the question
before assassinate him you know is
whether he could be taken out in one way
or another yet Bush after going through
this is the answer to your question is
no he says I I can't imagine the answer
your question I don't know that well
what does that say about your leadership
capabilities as leader of the CIA not to
know about information was coming out of
the DEA I don't know what it says about
that says would all right can we hold
these people to account are we going to
ask people something because their
involvement in this so-called national
security machinery you see there's no
reason at all and this gets back to
something we talked about earlier David
say is it appropriate role for the
national security machinery in place now
to have as one of us raise on stretcher
that the conduct of the so-called drug
war is narco-terrorism fine that's a
police problem even if we use them
it doesn't have to be secret it has to
be open in the way you know if it is a
police problem with that we that we
handle these things to bring it in to
put it under the blanket of the
so-called national security is a very
dangerous thing and it has to be watched
it has to be fought against because it's
the use of the national security blanket
as a The Independent Counsel warrants
wolf and the iran-contra thing is
pointed out has prevented him from
carrying out appropriate prosecutions
because of the national security
restrictions on these things don't let
the national security blanket be placed
over our conduct or government because
it makes it next to impossible to hold
people legally accountable this is David
barsamian and I'm talking to former CIA
analyst David McMichael David you worked
for the Christic Institute for a year
1986 in 1987 and I was wondering if he
could bring us up to date on the the
activities of that organization I know
you left it and there was some dis dis
in an atmosphere of perhaps some
discomfort if I can describe that yeah
well first of all they answer your first
question the Christic Institute no
longer exists except for its legal
entity which is still fighting in
federal courts against the application
of very large fines under federal rule
11 for filing allegedly a frivolous
lawsuit secondly it's also faced with
possible action from the Internal
Revenue Service on charges I've been
violated his 501c3 status and in this
matter yeah the the further reference to
when I left am I I work for the Christic
Institute as the coordinator its
investigations for a year in 1986 1987 i
will say that
working with Danny Sheehan was was not
one which you could coordinate much of
anything and that was that well Danny is
you know is something along the line of
a force of nature as you know and
carried out the both the litigation and
the investigation there in a you know
very much on his own basis and I think
this was one of the problems that the
Christic Institute ran into and just in
terms of my own discomfort as I became
more familiar with what the tank a suit
involved and this is just my own
criticism here in either way it is a
criticism and I think frankly before I
make it that the crista gainst who did
an enormous amount of good on the one
hand simply through its investigation
its outreach activities and exposing and
forcing responses to great amounts of
very questionable activity which they
say the media we can get back to that
old devil the media was not doing at the
time and the fact that its exposures
preceded the unfolding of the
iran-contra affair gave great deal of
credibility and provide a lot of
information to the to the votes of
congressional investigations into the
subsequent prosecution but the problem
in litigation ille terms was that this
was a lawsuit a civil complaint under
the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act and it was in defense
of a plaintiff and what this required
was a demonstration that the named
defendants in fact constituted a
racketeering organization and believe me
that law is so loosely drawn it so if it
was Robert Blake he's at the law school
University of Notre Dame that frankly
David any any five people with Italian
surnames to exchange Christmas cards can
be pretty well demonstrated to be
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
organization the second thing under a
civil complaint is that you have to
demonstrate during the statutory period
that organization come
at least two predicate acts in fact in a
in a criminal prosecution or the act
that all is required under a civil
complaint how are you however you have
to demonstrate that one of those acts is
that which damaged the plaintiff in
other words in this case which had do is
demonstrate that one of the predicate
acts was the bombing atla penka which I
don't mean a lot of time to get into
here but unfortunately in my view as a
as a law firm public interest law firm
representing a client the desire to
demonstrate this wide-ranging conspiracy
going back over a number of years I
think tempted the Christic Institute to
go beyond their obligations to the
client and to expend vast resources in
in demonstrating hopefully hundreds of
predicate offenses under the statute if
you will and the result of which the
resources were spread too thin and was
unable to make the case on LaPenta per
se which of course has now left the
plaintiffs having lost their suit and
being by the way themselves liable for
the whole penalty of of the of the the
so-called rule 11 frivolous filing
regulation which amounts now do
something over to millions of dollars
and that was unfortunate I was very
unfortunate and many discussions we had
about the you know where the focus of
that investigation should go and while
i'm personally of the belief that the
evidence should have been presented to a
jury and the judge king acted wrongly in
dismissing the suit on frivolous grounds
before he allowed that evidence to go to
a jury and i'm going there are many
other criticisms as it can be made there
but i'm not a lawyer but the lawyers
with whom I have spoken on that have
strong criticisms about the way that
case was litigated and unfortunately
because the case was lost you say the
whole investigation has now been
discredited and and that is unfortunate
very unfortunate and also I want to tell
you for another thing David in this
that the the krista case is only one of
the more gross examples of the
increasing application in public
interest law group filings of federal
rule 11 which assigns where the the
judge finds the filing frivolous the
assignment of the whole expenses of the
case to the you know to those who filed
it and this has produced a very chilling
effect on in the in public interest law
oh that's to be considered as well what
about the status of journalist Tony ever
gone and Martha honey they were of
course involved in the case they're the
plaintiffs okay oh the the situation for
them is very perilous because they are
equally and separately liable for the
whole penalties under Rule 11 I mean
these are people who had no money going
in and now they're there they could be
you know bankrupt it for the rest of
their lives I don't want to poison the
well too much here but I'm just want to
offer you some observations I've had of
seen myself in the numerous occasions
that he's come to boulder and two tapes
that I've heard just on the face of it
obvious misrepresentation of facts wrong
names wrong places and dates etc and I
just observed in the audience's here and
elsewhere people just mesmerized sitting
in rapt attention as as if there were no
being getting a kind of a messianic your
tablet you used the term that I would
have used it and that's unfortunate and
in this in this business which I'm
involved danny is not the only one I
have encountered who has let's say
messianic tendencies and that is
unfortunate it is really unfortunate and
it you know what can I say look I like
Danny Sheehan as a person I like his
wife Sarah Nelson I you know but these
are these are areas which I very very
strong disagreements the carelessness
with with with facts as you point out
the reliance on on suspect sources
without you know full investigation the
making of statements we're dealing with
this all the time David and I think
we're leading into an area of this
interview I know you're interested in is
you know is basically I think its
responsibility on the part of those who
are engaged in a very important struggle
in this I believe in cutting back this
national security state which in itself
has served as as cover for all sorts of
crimes matter of fact they said
yesterday at that meeting reading
Independent Counsel orange washes jun
2015 is very interesting in which he
says it's simply because of the cover
provided by the various national
security laws which exists in this
country it is impossible to prosecute
persons engaging these activities for
the actual crimes that they commit the
only thing they can be prosecuted for is
the cover-up activities and this is a
very scary situation because you give
people a license to steal they steal you
give people a license to kill they kill
we know that so as I say it's the I
think the premier the priority
responsibility for people who get
engaged in the work of fighting this
system to be extremely cautious and sure
of their facts and not to discredit
themselves or the cause in which they
are enlisted and if there's an a major
charge we made against the Christian
Student tension in that conduct is
precisely that they did not exercise the
appropriate caution in this it is not a
strategy that the Messianic strategy is
not one which I think works or is good
yet on the other hand I think this is
very important going on the basis of
stuff we talked about earlier in this
interview we know that the greater
burden of lies
is put forward precisely by the
officials of this country George Bush is
a liar Ronald Reagan was a liar ahead of
Casper Weinberger's a liar that's why
he's going on trial we cannot take these
people at their word long ago the
reporter who broke open at least on
Lacan the countryside the iran-contra
scandal bob perry who's a book was a
deceiving America is now out Babu is one
of the great reporters the United States
pointed out to me he says I'm going to
be ruined we're sitting at National
Airport talking in 1984 he says I'm
going to be ruined a baby so do you know
who you know why I'm going to be ruined
because they're gonna prove on five
percent wrong yeah I gotta prove on five
percent wrong he says he know who's
gonna ruin me these people who if they
were ever ten percent right to be a
miracle listen what what's happened to
the hundreds of thousands perhaps
millions of dollars at the critic
Institute has raised not to mention the
hopes of of people who attended tea
parties and public evasion and that kind
of thing well first of all the I
honestly think that the that the monies
are accounted for there is no is no
question of that the records were kept
well they had to be because the place
would being audited almost a daily basis
by the IRS as you can expect that's true
however I think people who made those
contributions and now you know see their
hopes dashed you see argue bound to feel
disappointed matech I've lost money and
investments myself so you know that it's
analogous what is what is sad however
and really tragic is to know that the
monies which you are in escrow now you
know to pay these things are going to go
into the pockets of the lawyers for
people like John sing loud you know
Theodore G shaklee and others I mean
this is a this is a shame I mean what
what if you really want to put it that
way yeah the
people who you know sincerely you know
contributed to the Christic Institute or
our bar I think entitled to feel
disappointed and even better that the
money they contributed went into the
pockets of the bad guys eventually too
bad there's an enormous amount of
attention to an interest in conspiracy
theories in the country and I think this
ties in with a lot of what we've been
talking to about the disillusionment and
the the public apathy and cynicism as
well because people are turning to
secret teams and quick quick fixes as
they were to really institutional
problem structural issues and it's
interesting this this notion of and I
know the Christic Institute was talking
about a lot and we've heard it in in
every campaign that the people need to
take back our country as the notion
being that the country was once ours and
it has been taken away by these secret
teams and now we have to retrieve it
this is turning into a speech rather
than the question but what what in the
in the in the cultural again V the
political atmosphere is generating this
interest in conspiracy theories and
quick fixes as i call them rather than
really a penetrating deep investigative
analyses well first of all your years as
aware as i am and certainly you know
Hofstadter pointed out 35 or more years
ago you know the the conspiratorial
strain runs deep in American political
history the the suspicions of the
Illuminati at the in the early stages of
our country's history the the
know-nothing parties with their fears of
and the anti-masonic parties you know
which desperately fearful of the these
deep-rooted conspiracies up like a great
part in the history of our country so
it's not you know it's not unexpected to
find this now the second thing I think
the one should point out is if you
examine the the legal codes both on the
state and federal level in this country
you will find I would say if you if you
ran a
a word analysis there that conspiracy is
going to rank very high among the words
that you'll find because conspiracy is a
crime if it's conducted for criminal
purposes you know in fact conspiracy can
only be a criminal activity and more
people I would suppose are convicted in
this country in federal and state courts
especially in the area so call white
collar crime or political crimes on
grounds of conspiracy than any other
thing so it's no no sense denying that
conspiracy exists is recognized legally
so so all I can really respond to this
is it say that I'm both in terms of our
tradition in terms of our legal reality
you know conspiracy is the thing to look
for now if you are looking for and as I
think is the real question you're asking
me but first of all I want to stab the
conspiracy is a respectable term both
traditionally and legally if what you
were looking for is the existence of
some let's say some nationwide expansion
of the Yale Skull and Bones secret
society which brings in a significant
number of people who meet regularly
let's say it Bohemian Grove or some
other place you know to plot and
conspire together as to how this elite
organization will direct the affairs of
the country you know in the nature of
things you're going to get off into some
fairly fanciful areas but again I'm
going to I'm going to insist is grounded
in a certain reality because one thing
that we know if we read Adam Smith you
know who dealt intercourse with
conspiracy you know that no group of
people and I'm paraphrasing closely you
know who are engaged in the same trade
right can meet together without
conspiring to fix prices to organize
markets and so forth and I don't think
it's unreasonable to say that where
people who have a letter say
common ideology and political agenda and
who aren't possessed into a greater or
lesser degree with access to power or
with the control of power meet together
to determine how they're going to
achieve their objectives they are in
fact let us say conspiring so from that
point of view I'd say you know I'm not
afraid to use to use the term now
whether it's simply because like most
swords it cuts both ways you see is that
one of the one of the most marvelous
charges and an all-purpose defense that
can be made against people who point out
that in fact certain people did meet
together at certain time and acted let
us say in contravention of law to
achieve certain objectives to say oh you
are merely a conspiracy theorist and
thus you know dismiss the whole affair
is not exactly in my view a a right
thing to do either we cited here earlier
Mike Levine Mike's been on the inside of
the drug war for many many years and the
what he describes you know frequently
would you want to call it conspiracy
theory or would you accept the fact that
in the conduct of this so-called drug
war the ability to manipulate popular
fear loathing for this the ability to by
manipulation of the enforcement of law
against this to access great amounts of
money for various purposes is is I think
a matter of record and it cannot simply
be dismissed in terms of saying you know
conspiracy theory so I'll take you to
one other thing I go back to this
extraordinary meeting at the Georgetown
Law Center the last week extraordinary
to me in any case where the current
Secretary of the National Security
Council Nicholas B Rostow who has been
accused as you know by Henry Gonzalez of
organizing the is that a conspiracy
federal government withhold documents
from his investigating committee his
father Eugene Rostow a former adviser to
Lyndon Johnson it was also they're both
of these and several others
distinguished parties at the amendments
argued that in matters of war and peace
or determination as to whether to carry
out let us say an assassination of a
foreign leader is that the real process
you see is for the president and his
inner circle you see and we all accept
that presidential advisers you know are
not elected people the colonel houses of
this world the mandolin advised Woodrow
Wilson for example the eminence grise of
the day they are not elected officials
people of the year of the President and
here is people discussing the wood real
way decisions are made you see is for
the president you see to get together
with these people and a few of the herd
Bulls in the Congress to discuss what
ought to be done now is this a secret
team is this and conspiracy you know the
terms are easy to to employ on the one
and they're also easy to attack on it
but there is a certain reality there
David and I think it is it is wise not
just to accept it as a reality but any
interest of open government which is
really what this is all about you see is
to identify who are you a herd bull what
is your name what did you do in this
circumstance so the team if it exists is
no longer a secret team and I think that
is a worthwhile objective and it simply
muddies the waters I think here to get
into a a debate over is conspiracy
theory a bad term music and the people
who insist on exploring what I think we
reasonably can expect as the system of
interlocking relation
in ships and discussions among an
identifiable group of people you know
this is this a standard of sociological
and political research in this country
who in fact are making the decisions in
boulder in Colorado see in in the United
States this is these are worthwhile
political objectives and those who
pursue them of course can be led down
paths I'm suppose I'm let down one
almost every week I'm not smartest guy
in the world but point of matter is that
if you are interested in the process of
open government of holding to account
those who hold public positions not only
their use of public monies but for the
decisions which they make which lead the
things like the Gulf War arguable if
you're truly interested in that you have
to keep pursuing it and accept the fact
that if you do the finger is dumb be
point active oh you are a conspiracy
theorist be careful of your sources
investigate you know thoroughly look at
documents you get and understand that a
great document you get are going our
suspect themselves be be careful in your
in your public utterances on its be able
to back up your work fine but keep going
after it because that's the objective
open government and holding to account
public officials tip relaying his
monograph the right who's the left
vintage euless among others as using
quote questionable sources sure I talk
to questionable sources all the time but
you know I I think what I have tried to
demonstrate in and what we just talked
about is is in talking to the
questionable source you know now and I
have a great deal problem of chips
article you see because part of what i
read into it and perhaps unfairly is it
to him a questionable source is first
and foremost and ideologically
questionable source and I'm perfectly
prepared to believe let's say that
haruki you know an idiomatically
questionable source may have
unquestionably accurate information on a
particular point and I think I'm capable
within limits of checking out that so
I'm not you know in the first place you
know going to cut myself off from
sources of information on the grounds of
there being ideologically questionable I
think I'm capable of distinguishing the
questionable information from the
accurate information and that's where I
have my problem with chips then
interestingly enough as he as he you
know titles his article the right who's
the left there are elements on the right
in this country you see who feel the day
to are unfairly cut out of the political
process and that they are being
manipulated and deceived just as many of
those on the left field that they are
cut out of the political process being
manipulated and deceived and I think
that having said that as you can see
that within limits there is a certain
identification of interest which is
openness and accountability and in the
case of the larue cheese of course it
got very personal because for whatever
reason and I can't get into that here is
the opening of his extraordinary
prosecution of the federal government
against the larue organization the
manner in which those cases were handled
in the in the Northern Virginia courts
just as a comparable circumstance for
example one looks at the extraordinary
prosecution of Edwin Wilson in the 1980s
usually so well admin Wilson is not an
admirable person at all but the process
by which these prosecutions were carried
out you know does raise important
questions and once again that always
goes I think to to run the important
aspects of attempting to live under rule
of law you see the law
if you really want to live under
protects bad people as well as good
people and once you make the distinction
that it's okay for the law not to be
observed in order to take care of bad
people good people are put very much at
risk I think that's a very important
thing to hang on to how can people find
out more about your organization and its
publication unclassified well I think
the easiest way to find out about our
organization is to subscribe to our
publication unclassified because I think
we lay out there and I think you read it
David from time to time or not I hope
the fact that you're talking to me
indicates that you know you find it in
informative and useful publication we
deal principally with issues of policy
involving the national security
apparatus and follow in-depth
congressional hearings and things that
don't often get touched upon in the
press but I think revealed the way
things are going there so they say if
you want to know more about the
association of national security alumni
which is an organization of former
members of the national security
apparatus in this country we have
members who come like myself out of the
CIA we have others who were Mike Levine
and we've just mentioned as a member
from the Drug Enforcement Administration
former FBI agents former members of the
the NSA the National Security Agency and
so forth and people coming from military
intelligence as well all with the common
objective of opposing excessive secrecy
and the use of covert operations and the
implementation of foreign policy our
publication which is bimonthly is called
unclassified and a subscription is
twenty dollars a year which is a
tax-deductible contribution because we
are a 501 c 3 corporation took us only
two years to get our application handle
to Pat Robertson 10 minutes but
I guess this is different but those who
are interested and I want both to
support the Association would inform
themselves further can do this by
sending their tax deductible
contribution which is their subscription
to unclassified their check made to the
association of national security alumni
if you can fit that on a check to vern
lion who is our treasurer and it's ly o
n the address is 921 pleasant street des
Moines Iowa 50 309 and let me let me
repeat that the if you wish to subscribe
to unclassified and learn more about the
association of national security alumni
make your tax-deductible $20 check to
vern lion let me scratch that make your
check to the association of national
security alumni and send it to vern lion
921 pleasant street des moines iowa 5030
sign my guest has been David McMichael
former CIA analyst board member of the
Association of national security alumni
and editor of unclassified thank you
very much thanks for having me David